# Source Article Archive

- Title: Create streamlined project management workflows using database automations
- URL: https://www.notion.com/help/guides/create-streamlined-project-management-workflow-using-database-automations
- Time: 2026-03-12 01:13:08

## Extract

Create streamlined project management workflows using database automations Product Notion Your AI workspace Notion Calendar Notion Mail Notion AI AI tools for work Agents Automate busywork AI Meeting Notes Perfectly written by AI Enterprise Search Find answers instantly Knowledge Base Centralize your knowledge Docs Simple and powerful Projects Manage any project Integrations Connect your apps Security Safe and scalable . See what’s new → Download the Notion App → AI AI features Notion AI AI tools for work Agents Automate busywork AI Meeting Notes Perfectly written by AI Enterprise Search Find answers instantly Explore use cases For work For life Solutions Teams Eng & Product Design Marketing IT Company size Startups Small businesses Enterprise Use Cases Education Personal Professional AI use cases Resources Browse Templates Consultants Integrations Discover What&#x27;s New Customer stories Blog Webinars Learn Academy Product tours Help Enterprise Pricing Request a demo Log in Get Notion free Help Center Guides ← Guides Create streamlined project management workflows using database automations Database automations give you the power to create custom workflows handling the repetitive admin tasks of project management, so you’ll spend less time clicking buttons and more time on high-impact work. 10 min read Automations built into your database mean you can save time, simplify day-to-day work, and cut down on potential errors. In this guide How database automations save time and let you focus on the bigger picture Set up workflows for your tasks and projects Three automations for Notion Projects 1. Start a new task 2. Kick off a project 3. Send an email when a form is filled out Automate complexity away with formulas Getting started Setting up a formula-based automation More database automations for all your work As a project manager (or anyone who manages work), you might be inundated with repetitive tasks — updating project statuses, adding and assigning new tasks, sending out reminders, and so on, all the way from project kickoff to sign-off. The manual workload increases as your team grows, but with Notion these tedious tasks can become database automations you set and forget. In this guide, we’ll show you how to use database automations to set up custom workflows to streamline your processes and make sure nothing slips through the cracks. Add automations to any database — but they’re uniquely powerful in assisting with project and task management. How database automations save time and let you focus on the bigger picture Database automations consist of trigger events and the sequence of actions that follows. You’ll set up triggers and subsequent actions which are based on changes within database properties. The automation is structured as follows: “When any of these occur (a trigger), do this (an action). View, edit, and create automations by clicking the lightening bolt ⚡️ to open the automations menu So, for example, your trigger could be when a new page is added to the database, and the resulting actions might fill up some properties with your chosen responses. Database automations can complete or update properties, add or edit pages in another database, send Slack notifications, and more. You can customize automations as needed and have several running in the same database for different scenarios. While this feature is available in any Notion database, it’s uniquely powerful in the context of project management, where you need accurate workflows where nothing gets lost, missed, or forgotten. By creating database automations, you can: Reduce wasted time between tasks — Instead of your team members waiting around to be assigned their next project, they’ll be notified whenever something new lands on their plate. Prevent human error — When your team is juggling multiple projects, it’s often the manual tasks (like re-assigning a task) that get forgotten. Setting up automations will reduce everyone’s cognitive load and prevent anything from getting missed. Consolidate project management — Because database automations are native to Notion, you don’t need to create complex workflows using third-party tools. You can do all your project management in Notion to keep your team focused and reduce context-switching. Database automations are only available on some plan types Click to expand Set up workflows for your tasks and projects You can set up database automations in a few simple steps. In your projects or tasks database: Go to the options menu … and select Automations or just click on the lightning bolt icon. Choose New automation and rename it if you wish. Next, select your triggers, which can be when a new page is added, a certain property (or properties) are edited, or Any property is edited. Triggers are formatted as “or” statements, so if any one of the triggers occurs, the automation will occur. Choose the resulting actions, such as adding a new page to this database or another database, editing a property (in this database or another), send a Slack notification. Click Create to save the automation. Anytime you want to edit your automations, come back to the menu and make your changes. Build your automation by selecting triggers and actions. Choose which pages your automation will apply to Click to expand You can also set up notifications to be sent to Gmail! Click to expand Three automations for Notion Projects Ready to start building your own automations? Here are some helpful examples to try out in your projects and tasks databases. 1. Start a new task Every time you add a new task to your database, you can assign that task to someone, send them a notification, and give it the correct status. To do this, create a new task and call it something like “New task flow”. Go to + Add trigger and select + Page added . In the + Add action menu, give all new pages the status Not Started , and select a team member to assign them to. Finally, click Send Slack notification to and choose who you want to notify. Now, whenever you add a new task, you’ll see all those properties are completed, and a Slack notification is sent. New tasks added to your database will have some properties filled out, and task owners will be notified. Editing Slack notifications Click to expand 2. Kick off a project To simplify the process of kicking off a project, you can create a Project kickoff automation in your Projects database. The trigger will be when a project’s status is changed from Not started to Planning , and the actions that follow will automatically schedule a project kickoff meeting and notify the project manager. In the Actions menu, select Add page to and find the meeting notes database. Call the new page Project Kickoff and click Edit another property to tag all team members and set the meeting date to Today , which will be the current date whenever the workflow is triggered. Finally, we can send a Slack notification to the project manager to alert them that the project is about to kick off. Create a “Project Kickoff” automation to get projects started effortlessly. 3. Send an email when a form is filled out Imagine you have a company Help Desk database with a form that allows employees to submit requests directly. You want to notify the assignee every time someone fills out that form. Here&#x27;s how to set this up in a few simple steps: Click the lightning bolt icon and select + New automation In the trigger section, choose Page added From the list of actions, select Send mail to... and customize the email content Select &#x27;Send mail to&#x27; from the list of actions That&#x27;s it! Now, whenever someone submits a new request, the assignee will receive an email notification. For more details on connecting Gmail, check out our help center article . Use &quot;@&quot; to mention specific pages, people, or properties in email actions Click to expand Automate complexity away with formulas Sometimes, simple &quot;if-then&quot; statements just don&#x27;t cut it w
